## Notre Dame Organum

Leonin (1150-1201 ca.)
- Compiled *Great Book of Organum* (*Magnus liber organui*)
This is the time where monophonic music expands to more than one voice. 

Perotin (1183-1238 ca.)
- Both men where choirmasters as Notre Dame.
- Expanded the nuj.........

*Gaude Maria virgo* (Leonin)
- Has two voices over the Tenor long notes (held)
- youtube.com/watch?v=ZFgDWOPLdlU

Three principles are represented in the music of the Notre Dame school: organum, conductus and motet

Motets are usually done in latin. The Counterpart is the Madrigal which is done in vernacular. i.e. An Italian madrigal would be done in Italian.

Motet (derived from French "mot"=word)
- Addition of texts to melismatic organum
- Polytextual = Two languages used, Latin and French

## Ars Nova

Meaning: "new art" or "new technique"

Leading composer *ars nova* - Guillaume de **Machaut** (c. 1300-77)

- Machaut also wrote chansons (French word for secular song)
- He created *Puis qu en oubli*, a 3 voice polyphonic chanson

## Mass
Two types:
- Ordinary - text remains the same
- Proper - text varies

Mass Ordinary:
- Kyrie
- Gloria
- Credo
- Sanctus
- Benedictus
- Agnus Dei


Machaut's most famous composition - *Messe de Notre Dame*, a four part setting of the Mass Ordinary

## New French Chanson
- Secular polyphonic French song of the late Medieval and Renaisssance periods.
- Chanson composers in the early 16th century and during the long reign of Francis....
- In 1528, **Pierre Attaingnant** is considered to be the first large-scale publisher of single impression movable type for music-printing - faster and cheaper than **Petrucci**
	- Ottaviano Petrucci (Fossombrone, 18 June 1466 – Venice, 7 May 1539) was an Italian printer. His Harmonice Musices Odhecaton, a collection of chansons printed in 1501, is commonly misidentified as the first book of sheet music printed from movable type. Actually that distinction belongs to the Roman printer Ulrich Han's Missale Romanum of 1476. Nevertheless, Petrucci's later work was extraordinary for the complexity of his white mensural notation and the smallness of his font, and he did in fact print the first book of polyphony using movable type. He also published numerous works by the most highly regarded composers of the Renaissance, including Josquin des Prez and Antoine Brumel.
- In Paris, between 1528 and 1552, he brought out more than 50 collections of chansons, about 1500 pieces altogether.
- Leading composers of chansons in Paris after Semisy and Januequin was **Pierre Certon**
	- Que N'Est Elle Aupree de Moy is Polyphonic

## Opera in France
- In the 1670s, a national French opera is finally achieved under the patronage of Louis XIV (nicknamed the Sun King).
- New Orleans emulated what Louis XIV was about, supporting the people. 
- Remains essentially unchanged until past the middle of the 18th century
- **Jean-Baptiste Lully** (1632-1687) - first important composer
	- He succeeds in blending elements from ballet and drama in a genre called *tragédie lyrique*.
	- French people always want dancing. In any opera, there is always a dance somewhere during the opera
	- Lully helps established musical genre: *ouverture*; two sections (slow-contrapuntal).
		- In music, counterpoint is a method of composition in which two or more musical lines are simultaneously played which are harmonically correlated yet independent in rhythm and melodic contour. Contrapuntal is more specific than Polyphonic, referring to a particular technique within polyphonic texture.
	- *Armide* - French lyrique tragédie
	- Ouverture from *Armide*
	- youtube.com/watch?v=HWIaanFmhYY
- **Christoph Willibald Gluck** (1714-1787) - German composer known for ....
	- Expeericned great success iwth opera in Paris after 1774
	- Two important operas. Alceste and Orfeo
- Comnbined influcnes of Gluck
- ...
- Leader was **Giacomo Meyerbeer** (1791-1864), whose two operas *Robert le diable (1831) and Les Hugeuenots (1836)* helped to established Grand Opera.
- Other composers of grand opera around 1830 were Auber and Rossini
- ....
- Georges Bizet (1838-1875) was a young promising composer who struggled for success.
	- His last opera, *Carmen* has become a large success but after his untimely death.

## Paris Conservatory
- 1795 - the Conservatoire de Musique de Paris is created
- College of music and dance now situated on avenue Jean Jaurè

## Romanticism in France

Hector Berlioz *Symphonic fantastique* (1830)
- A gifted artists poisons himself with opium in the depths of despair over hopeless love
	- 5 tilted movements to go with a written program
	- Over 90 instruments
	- 5 movements depicting various episodes
- 5 movements are as follows
	- Reveries
	- A Ball
	- Scene in the Fields
	- March to the scaffold
	- Drream of the Night of the Sabbath
- Idée fixe
- Dies irae
	- **Idée fixe** is a French term that translates to “fixed idea” in English. In music, it refers to a recurring theme or motif that appears throughout a composition, representing a particular idea, character, or emotion. The term was popularized by the French composer Hector Berlioz, who used it extensively in his symphonic work, **“Symphonie fantastique”**.
	- In “Symphonie fantastique,” the idée fixe represents the protagonist’s obsessive love for his beloved. This theme reappears in various forms and transformations across the symphony’s five movements, reflecting the changing emotional states and situations of the protagonist. The idée fixe serves as a unifying thread, providing continuity and cohesion to the symphony.
	- **Dies irae** (“Day of Wrath”) is a Latin hymn describing the Last Judgment, where the souls of the dead are summoned before God to account for their deeds. This hymn has medieval origins and is part of the traditional Requiem Mass (Mass for the Dead) in the Roman Catholic liturgy.
	- Musically, the “Dies irae” chant is characterized by a distinctive, somber melody that has been used by many composers to evoke a sense of doom, judgment, and mortality.

Camille Saint Saens
- Important for Carnival of the Animals and Danse Macabre

Gabriel Faure (1845-1924)
- one of the founders of the National Society for French Music
- Why is this needed? Beethoven, a German, is worshipped, so they needed to promote French music.

## Impressionism in France
- Claude Debussy (1862-1918) - great French composer, and potent influence on 20th century music
	- His music is designed to create descriptive impressions by evoking moods through rich and varied harmonies and timbres.
- Eric Satie (1866-1925)


## 20th Century in France
...

Edith Piaf (1915-1963)
- Famous Song is *La vie en rose* (Life through rose-colored glasses)
- Dies of liver cancer and is bured in Pere Lanchaise Cemetery in Paris

Django Reinhardt (1910-53)
- Belgian/Gypsy jazz guitarist who played and recorded with the Quintet of the Hot Club of France
- Important for his single note melodies
- With his partner violinist Stephane Grapelli, they were the first European jazz musicans to have a significant impact on jazz in America

## Cabaret in Paris
- Josephine Baker (1906-1975) ...
	- Performed in a Paris nightclub called "Bricktop's"

## Jazz in Paris
- After WWII, the Saint Germain des Pres quarter and the nearby Saint Michel quarter became home to many small jazz clubs, mostly found in cellars because of a lack of space
- Most of the clubs closed by the ealry 1960s, as mucial tastes shifted torward rock and roll.

## Danish Stuff

Dieterich Buxtehude (1637-1707)
- Baroque Danish organist and composer
- style greatly influenced other composers, such as JS Bach and GF Handel
- considered one of the most important composers of the 17th century
- Wrote Chaconne in C minor
	- Bass repeats every four measures
	- Is Polytphnoc
	- Ostinato in the Bass - A repetitive pattern in the Bass
Niels Wilhelm Gade (1817-1890)
- Born and lived in Copenhagen
- Danish composer
- Royal Dniahs Orchestra violinist who premiered his 1st symphony
- Mendelssohn hired him to teach at the Conservatory in Leipzig where also he conduced at the Gewandhaus
- Met Robert Schumann there
- Returned to Copenhagen in 1848

Carl August Neilsen (1865-1931)
- Danish composer, conductor, and violinist
- Attended Royal Danish Academy of Music
- Studied with Niels Gade
- Married sculptor Anne Marie Broderson
- Aladdin Suite

Edvard Grieg (1843-1907)
- Born in Bergen, Norway
- Norwegian composer and pianist
- one of the leading Romantic era composers
- use of Norweigan folk music in his own compositions brought the music of Norway to fame, as well as helping to develop a national identity
- Wrote *Morning Mood*
- He meets Niels Gade in Copenhagan

Victor Borge (1909-2000)
- Danish-American pianist and comedian
- achieve great popularity in radio and television in both North American and Europe
- blend of music and comedy earned him the nicknames ("The Clown Prince of Denmark", "The Unmelancholy Dane", and "The Great Dane".)

Dizzy Mizz Lizzy
- Alternative rock band from Copenhagen
- Famous song called, *Silverflame*

Danish Music Museum (Musikmuseet)
- Røsenoms Alle 22, 1970 Frederiksberg

### Copenhagen Opera House
- national opera house of Denmark
- One of the most modern opera houses in the world and also one of the most expensive opera houses ever built at a a cost of 2.5 billion DKK (c. 370 Million USD)
- located on the island of Holmen
- Thetre can seat beween 1492 and 1703, depending on the size of the orchestra
- Orchestra pit is one of the largest; room for 110 musicians
- Opened in 2005 and the tenor Placido Domingo made a gala guest appearnce as Sigmund in Wagner's Die Walküre on April 7, 2006

## Koncerthuset
- is a concert hall designed by Jean Nouvel
- It forms parts of the new DR Byen complex, which houses the Danish Broadcasting Corporation
- Home of the Danish National Symphony Orchestra
- Main hall seats 1800
- 3 recording studios with variable acoustics

## Jazz Club

Musicians function within a prescribed role:
- Bass
	- supplies the foundation
	- walks a bass line
	- plays repetitive patterns
- Drums
	- keep time
	- provide color with the various sounds
- Guitar and/or piano
	- harmonic background
	- melodic enhancement

Musical interaction
- Eye Contact
- Body Language
- Non-Verbal Communication

Improvised Solos
- are they good or interesting
- more important to state why
- influenced by what famous jazz musicians
- Introverted or extroverted
- Mostly fast or slow
- Lots of notes or minimum number

## Jazzhus Montmartre
- Opened in 1959 in Dahlerupsgade; 1961 moved to Store Regnegade; 1976 - 1995 in Norregade
- Many jazz musicians, including Dexter Gordon, Stan Getz and Chet Baker have performed there
- In May 2010, it reopened at Store Regnegade 19A
- Address:
	- .........


## Carsten Dahl
- born in Copenhagen in 1967
- He taught himself both drums and piano
- turned professional in 1982
- He taught piano at the Danish Rhythmic Conservatory between 2012 and 2015
- By 2022, he had played on about 300 albums.
- He is also a painter
- Doing things that are not traditional
- Made the song - *Someday The Prince Will Come*
	- The Form of this song is ABAC
	- Each One is 8 Bars
- Chorus - A chorus is a section of a song that is repeated at least twice, encompasses the main message and tone of the song, and relieves the musical tension that is built up throughout the other parts of the song.


